dev/related-projects.rst, before:

.. _related-projects:

Related Projects
================

Beah
----

`Beah <https://beaker-project.org/docs-beah>`__ is the default test
harness used in Beaker.

BeakerLib
---------

`BeakerLib <https://fedorahosted.org/beakerlib/wiki/Manual>`__ is a
library useful for writing `Beaker tasks
<../docs/user-guide/writing-tasks.html>`__.


Jenkins Beaker builder plugin
-----------------------------

The `Jenkins Beaker builder plugin
<https://wiki.jenkins-ci.org/display/JENKINS/Beaker+Builder+Plugin>`__
integrates Jenkins with Beaker.

Integration with autotest
-------------------------

This is a work in progress which aims to integrate autotest and
Beaker. See `here
<https://lists.fedorahosted.org/pipermail/beaker-devel/2013-November/000843.html>`__
for some relevant discussions and the patch `here
<https://github.com/autotest/autotest/pull/629>`__.

Fedora's Beaker instance
------------------------

The Fedora project maintains a Beaker installation `here
<https://beaker.fedoraproject.org>`__.

Commit message:

Update link to Beah docs and refer restraint
Change-Id: I40c9eee5605a35591c26a9584baaf4085b4f6337

dev/related-projects.rst, after:

.. _related-projects:

Related Projects
================

Beah
----

`Beah <http://beah.readthedocs.org/>`__ is the default test
harness used in Beaker.

restraint
---------

`Restraint <https://github.com/p3ck/restraint>`__ is a minimal test
harness implementation for Beaker.

BeakerLib
---------

`BeakerLib <https://fedorahosted.org/beakerlib/wiki/Manual>`__ is a
library useful for writing `Beaker tasks
<../docs/user-guide/writing-tasks.html>`__.

Jenkins Beaker builder plugin
-----------------------------

The `Jenkins Beaker builder plugin
<https://wiki.jenkins-ci.org/display/JENKINS/Beaker+Builder+Plugin>`__
integrates Jenkins with Beaker.

Integration with autotest
-------------------------

This is a work in progress which aims to integrate autotest and
Beaker. See `here
<https://lists.fedorahosted.org/pipermail/beaker-devel/2013-November/000843.html>`__
for some relevant discussions and the patch `here
<https://github.com/autotest/autotest/pull/629>`__.

Fedora's Beaker instance
------------------------

The Fedora project maintains a Beaker installation `here
<https://beaker.fedoraproject.org>`__.
